initial draft blog for inpod (#14524)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2024/inpod-traffic-redirection-ambient/index.md

- From there, finally be redirected into the target pod’s network namespace (and processed by any rules there).

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

### Why did we drop the previous model?

In Istio ambient mesh, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSets:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.

> - A CNI node agent that handles enrolling new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

Author: ```suggestion
- A CNI node agent that handles adding new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.
```

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

### Why did we drop the previous model?

In Istio ambient mesh, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSets:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.
- A CNI node agent that handles enrolling new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

In the previous ambient mesh implementation, this is how mesh enrollment worked:

> - The `istio-cni` node agent detects an existing or newly-started Kubernetes pod with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.
> - The istio-cni node agent then establishes network redirection rules in the top-level node network namespace, such that

Author: ```suggestion
- The `istio-cni` node agent detects an existing or newly-started Kubernetes pod with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.
- The `istio-cni` node agent then establishes network redirection rules in the top-level node network namespace, such that
```

go through the host network namespace, or bypass it. You can go through the Linux user space networking stack,
or you can skip it and shuttle packets back and forth in the kernel space stack, etc etc. For every possible approach,
there’s probably a CNI implementation out there that makes use of it.

Which meant that with the previous redirection approach, there were a lot of CNI implementations ambient simply wouldn’t
work with. Given its reliance on node network namespace packet redirection - any CNI that didn’t route packets thru the
node network namespace would need a different redirection implementation. And even for CNIs that did do this, we would
have unavoidable and potentially unresolvable problems with conflicting node-level rules. Do we intercept before the CNI,
or after? Will some CNIs break if we do one, or the other, and they aren’t expecting that? Where and when is NetworkPolicy
enforced, since NetworkPolicy must be enforced in the node network namespace? Do we need lots of code to special-case
every popular CNI?

### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: The New Model

> In the current ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment works:

Author: ```suggestion
In the new ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment works:
```

> - A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with labels indicating it should be enrolled in the ambient mesh, is detected by
> the istio-cni node agent.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `istio-cni` node agent detects a Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started) with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.
```

access to, we built confidence in the work and decided to contribute this new traffic redirection
model - an *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has
been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.

The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection
sockets inside the pod’s network namespace, while still running outside the pod. With this approach, the traffic redirection
between ztunnel and application pods happens in a way that’s very similar to sidecars and application pods today and is
strictly invisible to any Kubernetes CNI. Network policy from any Kubernetes CNIs can continue to be enforced,
regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

## Technical deep dive of in-pod traffic redirection

First, let’s go over the basics of how a packet travels between pods in Kubernetes.

### Linux, Kubernetes, and CNI  - What’s A Network Namespace, And Why Does It Matter?

> In Linux, a *container* is simply one or more Linux processes running within isolated namespaces, and a Linux namespace

Author: ```suggestion
In Linux, a *container* is one or more Linux processes running within isolated Linux namespaces. A Linux namespace
```

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

### Why did we drop the previous model?

In Istio ambient mesh, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSets:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.
- A CNI node agent that handles enrolling new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

In the previous ambient mesh implementation, this is how mesh enrollment worked:

> - A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled` indicating it should
> be included in the ambient mesh, is detected by the istio-cni node agent.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `istio-cni` node agent detects an existing or newly-started Kubernetes pod with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.
```

---

The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - its new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted with several categories of 3rd-party Container Networking Interface (CNI) implementations.
Through GitHub issues and Slack discussions, we heard our users wanted to be able to use ambient mode in [minikube](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/46163) and [Docker Desktop](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/47436), with CNI implementations like [Cilium](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/44198) and [Calico](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40973), and on services that ship in-house CNI implementations like [OpenShift](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42341) and [Amazon EKS](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340).

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any CNI implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any CNI implementation. After all, ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!
```

Nit.. but ambient should be lowercase unless it's the first word of a sentence.

---
title: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - its new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party Container Networking Interface (CNI) implementations.

Author: ```suggestion
Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted with several categories of 3rd-party Container Networking Interface (CNI) implementations.
```

### Addressing the challenges

A new solution was necessary - doing redirection of any sort in the node's network namespace would create unavoidable conflicts, unless we compromised our compatibility requirements.

In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between the sidecar and application pod, as both operate within
the pod's network namespace. This led to a light-bulb moment: why not mimic sidecars, and configure the redirection in
the application network namespace? 

While this sounds like a "crazy simple" thought, is this even possible, given ztunnel runs
in the Istio system namespace? After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace
could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace, which is a basic Linux socket capability.
However, to make this work, and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel
as well as the istio-cni agent.

> ### Traffic redirection in ambient now
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

the packet might (depending on how networking was set up):
- Be processed by any rules within the source pod’s network namespace.
- Leave the source pod network namespace, and bubble up into the node’s network namespace where it is processed by any rules in that namespace.
- From there, finally be redirected into the target pod’s network namespace (and processed by any rules there).

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

> ### Istio ambient traffic redirection: why did we drop the previous model?

Author: ```suggestion
### Why did we drop the previous model?
```

---
title: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

> The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - it's new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - its new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.
```

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party CNI implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party Container Networking Interface (CNI) implementations.
```

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party CNI implementations.

Author: sorry this is outdated as multiple people proposes changes to it.  I'll try resolve it then add it manually.

Through GitHub issues and Slack discussions, we heard our users wanted to be able to use ambient mode in [minikube](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/46163) and [Docker Desktop](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/47436), with CNI implementations like [Cilium](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/44198) and [Calico](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40973), and on services that ship in-house CNI implementations like [OpenShift](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42341) and [Amazon EKS](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340).

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any CNI implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!
```

Define the acronym on first use instead. There were several uses of CNI before this so it doesn't make sense to define CNI now.

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Author: sorry this is outdated as multiple people proposes changes to it.  I think it has been addressed, do let me know if not!

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Reviewer 2: Do you think there's value in standardizing the language around things like `Ambient` vs `ambient` vs `ambient mesh`? I'm happy to go through and provide suggestions on a version that's not outdated but I don't want to be a nuisance if this is too pedantic

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Author: I think we use ambient or ambient mesh in other blogs, both are fine.

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Reviewer 2: Sounds good. I think all the other comments were addressed

> At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach Beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help ambient reach beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer, and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.
```

> At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach Beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.

Author: Agreed - wish we contributed sooner!

> At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach Beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.

Author: sorry this is outdated as multiple people proposes changes to it.  I think it has been addressed, do let me know if not!

## How did we get here?

### Service meshes and CNIs: it's complicated

Istio is a service mesh, and all service meshes by strict definition are not *CNI implementations* - service meshes require a [spec-compliant, primary CNI implementation](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/#overview-1) to be present in every Kubernetes cluster, and rest on top of that. 

This primary CNI implementation may be provided by your cloud provider (AKS, GKE, and EKS all ship their own), or by third-party CNI implementations like Calico. Some service meshes may also ship bundled with their own primary CNI implementation, which they explicitly require to function. 

Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply of high-level authentication and authorization policy at the service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the basic networking pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in your cluster.

> Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house primary CNI implementation, and it is sometimes possible to run two primary CNI implementations in parallel within the same cluster (for instance, one shipped by the cloud provider, and a 3rd-party implementation), in practice this introduces a whole host of compatibility issues, strange behaviors, reduced featuresets, and simple incompatibilities due to the wildly varying mechanisms each CNI implementation might employ internally.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house primary CNI implementation, and it is sometimes possible to run two primary CNI implementations in parallel within the same cluster (for instance, one shipped by the cloud provider, and a 3rd-party implementation), in practice this introduces a whole host of compatibility issues, strange behaviors, reduced featuresets, and some incompatibilities due to the wildly varying mechanisms each CNI implementation might employ internally.
```

To avoid this, the Istio project has chosen not to ship or require their own primary CNI implementation, or even require a "preferred" CNI implementation - instead choosing to support CNI chaining with the widest possible ecosystem of CNI implementations, and ensuring maximum compatibility with managed offerings, cross-vendor support, and composability with the broader CNCF ecosystem.

### Traffic redirection in ambient alpha

The [istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) component is an optional component in the sidecar data plane mode,
commonly used to remove the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/) for
users deploying pods into the mesh. 

istio-cni is a required component in the ambient
data plane mode. Whenever pods are added to an ambient mesh, the istio-cni component configures traffic redirection for all
incoming and outgoing traffic between the pods and the [ztunnel](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) running on

> the pod's node, via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between the sidecar mechanism and the ambient alpha mechanism is that in the latter, pod traffic was redirected out of the pod network namespace, and into the ztunnel network namespace - necessarily passing through the node's network namespace on the way, which is where the bulk of the traffic redirection rules to achieve this were implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the pod's node, via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between the sidecar mechanism and the ambient mechanism is that in the latter, pod traffic was redirected out of the pod network namespace, and into the ztunnel network namespace - necessarily passing through the node's network namespace on the way, which is where the bulk of the traffic redirection rules to achieve this were implemented.
```

Author: yep agreed, i'd prefer to keep alpha in there to be clear it is the old model.

> As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that capturing and redirecting pod traffic in the node network namespace, as we were during ambient alpha, was not going to meet our requirements. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that capturing and redirecting pod traffic in the node network namespace, as we were during ambient alpha, was not going to meet our requirements. It was evident that achieving our goals in a generic manner across these diverse environments was not possible in this approach.
```

> As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that capturing and redirecting pod traffic in the node network namespace, as we were during ambient alpha, was not going to meet our requirements. It was evident that achieving our goals in a generic manner across these diverse environments was not possible in this approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments, which have their own default CNI, it became clear that capturing and redirecting pod traffic in the node network namespace, as we were during alpha development, was not going to meet our requirements. It was evident that achieving our goals in a generic manner across these diverse environments was not possible in this approach.
```

- The primary CNI implementation's basic node-level networking configuration could interfere with the node-level ambient networking configuration from Istio's CNI extension, causing traffic disruption and other conflicts.
- If users deployed a network policy to be enforced by the primary CNI implementation, the network policy might not be enforced when the Istio CNI extension is deployed (depending on how the primary CNI implementation enforces NetworkPolicy)

While we could design around this on a case-by-case basis for _some_ primary CNI implementations, we could not sustainably do so for _all_ of them that we wanted to support. We considered eBPF, but realized any eBPF implementation would have the same basic problem, as there is no standardized way to safely chain/extend arbitrary eBPF programs at this time, and we would still potentially have a hard time supporting non-eBPF CNIs with this approach.

### Addressing the challenges

A new solution was necessary - doing redirection of any sort in the node's network namespace would create unavoidable conflicts, unless we compromised our compatibility requirements.

> In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between sidecar and application pod, as both operate within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between the sidecar and application pod, as both operate within
```

sharing one Linux networking stack.

Linux namespaces are conceptually a lot like Kubernetes namespaces - logical labels that organize and isolate different
active processes, and allow you to create rules about what things within a given namespace can see and what rules are
applied to them - they simply operate at a much lower level.

When a process running within a network namespace creates a TCP packet outward bound for something else, the packet must be
processed by any local rules within the local network namespace first, then leave the local network namespace, passing
into another one.

For example, in plain Kubernetes without any mesh installed, a pod might create a packet and send it to another pod, and
the packet might (depending on how networking was set up):
- Be processed by any rules within the source pod’s network namespace.
- Leave the source pod network namespace, and bubble up into the node’s network namespace where it is processed by any rules in that namespace.
- From there, finally be redirected into the target pod’s network namespace (and processed by any rules there).

> In Kubernetes, the [CRI](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) (container *runtime* interface) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces

Author: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, the [CRI](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) (Container *Runtime* Interface) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
```

> In Kubernetes, the [CRI](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) (Container *Runtime* Interface) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
```

> for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) (container *networking* interface),

Author: ```suggestion
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) (Container *Networking* Interface),
```

> for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) (Container *Networking* Interface),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
```

entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

### Istio ambient traffic redirection: why did we drop the previous model?

In Istio ambient, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSet:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.
- A CNI node agent that handles enrolling new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

In the previous ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment worked:
- A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled` indicating it should
be included in the ambient mesh, is detected by the istio-cni node agent.
- The istio-cni node agent then establishes network redirection rules in the top-level node network namespace, such that
packets entering or leaving the enrolled pod would be intercepted and redirected to that node’s ztunnel on the relevant
proxy ports (15008, 15006, or 15001).

> This meant that for a packet created by a mesh-enrolled pod, that packet would leave that source pod, enter the node’s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that for a packet created by a mesh-enrolled pod, that packet would leave that source pod, enter the node’s
```

top-level network namespace, and then be intercepted and redirected to that node’s ztunnel (running in its own network
namespace) for proxying to the destination pod, with the return trip being similar.

This model worked well enough as a placeholder for the initial Ambient launch, but as mentioned, it has a fundamental
problem - there are many CNI implementations, and in Linux there are many fundamentally different and incompatible ways
in which you can configure how packets get from one network namespace to another. You can use tunnels, overlay networks,

> you can go through the host network namespace, or you can bypass it. You can go through the Linux user space networking stack,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
go through the host network namespace, or bypass it. You can go through the Linux user space networking stack,
```

or you can skip it and shuttle packets back and forth in the kernel space stack, etc etc. And for every possible approach,
there’s probably a CNI implementation out there that makes use of it.

> Which meant that with the previous redirection approach, there were lots of CNI implementations Ambient simply wouldn’t

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which meant that with the previous redirection approach, there were a lot of CNI implementations ambient simply wouldn’t
```

> work with, given its reliance on node network namespace packet redirection - any CNI that didn’t route packets thru the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
work with. Given its reliance on node network namespace packet redirection - any CNI that didn’t route packets thru the
```

node network namespace would need a different redirection implementation. And even for CNIs that did do this, we would

> have unavoidable and potentially unresolvable problems with conflicting node-level rules - do we intercept before the CNI,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have unavoidable and potentially unresolvable problems with conflicting node-level rules. Do we intercept before the CNI,
```

or after? Will some CNIs break if we do one, or the other, and they aren’t expecting that? Where and when is NetworkPolicy
enforced, since NetworkPolicy must be enforced in the node network namespace? Do we need lots of code to special-case
every popular CNI?

> ### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: The Current Model

Author: ```suggestion
### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: The New Model
```

In the current ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment works:
- A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with labels indicating it should be enrolled in the ambient mesh, is detected by
the istio-cni node agent.

>   - If a *new* pod is started that should be enrolled, a standard CNI plugin (as installed and managed by the istio-cni agent)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - If a *new* pod is started that should be enrolled, a CNI plugin (as installed and managed by the istio-cni agent)
```

> is triggered by the CRI, used to push a new pod event to the node’s istio-cni agent, and block pod startup until redirection
> is established. Since CNI plugins are invoked by the CRI as early as possible in the Kubernetes pod creation process,
> this ensures that we can establish traffic redirection early enough to prevent traffic escaping during startup,
> without relying on things like init containers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

is triggered by the CRI. This plugin is used to push a new pod event to the node’s `istio-cni` agent, and block pod startup until the agent successfully configures redirection. Since CNI plugins are invoked by the CRI as early as possible in the Kubernetes pod creation process, this ensures that we can establish traffic redirection early enough to prevent traffic escaping during startup, without relying on things like init containers.
```

>   - If an *already-running* pod becomes eligible for ambient enrollment, the istio-cni node agent’s Kubernetes API watcher
> triggers a new pod event, and redirection is configured in the same manner.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - If an *already-running* pod becomes eligible for ambient enrollment, the `istio-cni` node agent’s Kubernetes API watcher detects this, and redirection is configured in the same manner.
```

> - The istio-cni node agent hops into the pod’s network namespace and establishes network redirection rules inside the pod

Author: updated

> - The istio-cni node agent hops into the pod’s network namespace and establishes network redirection rules inside the pod
> network namespace, such that packets entering and leaving the pod are intercepted and transparently redirected to local
> proxy listening [ports](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#ports) (15008, 15006, 15001).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The istio-cni node agent hops into the pod’s network namespace and establishes network redirection rules inside the pod network namespace, such that packets entering and leaving the pod are intercepted and transparently redirected to the node-local ztunnel proxy instance listening on [well-known ports](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#ports) (15008, 15006, 15001).
```

- The istio-cni node agent then informs the node ztunnel over a Unix domain socket that it should establish local proxy
listening ports inside the pod’s network namespace, (on 15008, 15006, and 15001), and provides ztunnel with a low-level
Linux [file descriptor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_descriptor) representing the pod’s network namespace.
  - While typically sockets are created within a Linux network namespace by the process actually running inside that
network namespace, it is perfectly possible to leverage Linux’s low-level socket API to allow a process running in one
network namespace to create listening sockets in another network namespace, assuming the target network namespace is known
at creation time.
- The node-local ztunnel internally spins up a new proxy instance and listen port set, dedicated to the newly-enrolled pod.

> - Once the in-pod redirect rules are in place and the ztunnel has established the listen ports, the pod is enrolled in the

Reviewer 3: nit: to be consistent with other usages.

```suggestion
- Once the in-Pod redirect rules are in place and the ztunnel has established the listen ports, the pod is enrolled in the
```

Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every ambient-enrolled
pod has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
has no awareness of either.

Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between meshed pods in the current ambient model:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-between-mesh-pods.png"
    alt="HBONE traffic flows between meshed pods"
    >}}

And, as before, unencrypted plaintext traffic from outside the mesh can still be handled and policy enforced, for use cases
where that is necessary:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-plaintext.png"
    alt="Plain text traffic flow between meshed pods"
    >}}

### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: What This Gets Us

The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network
namespace. To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though

> there is, as before, **no sidecar proxy running in the pod** at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get

Author: updated

> The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network
> namespace. To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though
> there is, as before, **no sidecar proxy running in the pod** at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get
> packets **to and from** the pod. By design and by the CNI spec, they do not care what happens to packets after that point.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network namespace. To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though there is **no sidecar proxy running in the pod** at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get packets **to and from** the pod. By design and by the CNI spec, they do not care what happens to packets after that point.
```

This approach automatically eliminates conflicts with a wide range of CNI and NetworkPolicy implementations, and drastically
improves Istio ambient mesh compatibility with all major managed Kubernetes offerings across all major CNIs.

## Wrapping Up

With gracious support from the community on testing the change with various Kubernetes platforms and CNIs, and many rounds
of reviews from Istio maintainers, we are glad the [ztunnel](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/pull/747) and [istio-cni](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/48253) PRs merged to Istio 1.21 so our users

> can start running ambient on any Kubernetes platforms with any CNIs in Istio 1.21 or newer. We’ve tested this with Google,

Reviewer 5: nit: Google,Microsoft,Amazon OR GCP,Azure,AWS, OR GKE,AKS,EKS. We are consistent here

Reviewer: I thought the same, but AWS is Amazon Web Services, Inc. rather than just Amazon when I double checked.

Author: updated.

Microsoft, and AWS’s managed Kubernetes offerings and all the CNI implementations they offer, as well as with 3rd-party CNIs like
Calico and Cilium, as well as platforms like OpenShift, with solid results. We are extremely excited that we are able to

> move Istio Ambient forward to run everywhere with this innovative in-Pod traffic redirection approach between ztunnel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
move Istio ambient forward to run everywhere with this innovative in-Pod traffic redirection approach between ztunnel
```

> move Istio Ambient forward to run everywhere with this innovative in-Pod traffic redirection approach between ztunnel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
move Istio ambient mesh forward to run everywhere with this innovative in-Pod traffic redirection approach between ztunnel
```

Author: updated

and users’ application pods. With this top technical hurdle to ambient beta resolved, we can't wait to work with the
rest of the Istio community to get ambient to beta soon! To learn more about ambient’s beta progress, join us in

> the #ambient and #ambient-dev channel in Istio’s [slack](https://slack.istio.io), or attend the weekly ambient contributor [meeting](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/WORKING-GROUPS.md#working-group-meetings) on Wednesdays,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the #ambient and #ambient-dev channel in Istio’s [slack](https://slack.istio.io), or attend the [weekly ambient contributor meeting](https://github.com/istio/community/blob/master/WORKING-GROUPS.md#working-group-meetings) on Wednesdays,
```

> or check out the ambient beta [project board](https://github.com/orgs/istio/projects/9/views/3?filterQuery=beta) and help us fix something!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or check out the ambient mesh beta [project board](https://github.com/orgs/istio/projects/9/views/3?filterQuery=beta) and help us fix something!
```

been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.

The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection
sockets inside the pod’s network namespace, while still running outside the pod. With this approach, the traffic redirection
between ztunnel and application pods happens in a way that’s very similar to sidecars and application pods today and is
strictly invisible to any Kubernetes CNI. Network policy from any Kubernetes CNIs can continue to be enforced,
regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

## Technical deep dive of in-pod traffic redirection

First, let’s go over the basics of how a packet travels between pods in Kubernetes.

### Linux, Kubernetes, and CNI  - What’s A Network Namespace, And Why Does It Matter?

In Linux, a *container* is one or more Linux processes running within isolated Linux namespaces. A Linux namespace
is simply a kernel flag that controls what processes running within that namespace are able to see. For instance, if you

> create a new Linux network namespace and run a process inside it, that process can only see the networking rules created

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
create a new Linux network namespace via `ip netns add my-linux-netns` and run a process inside it, that process can only see the networking rules created
```

---

> title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"
```

description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

> The Istio project [announced its innovative new ambient mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

Author: ```suggestion
The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - it's new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.
```

Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party CNI implementations.
Through GitHub issues and Slack discussions, we heard our users wanted to be able to use ambient mode in [minikube](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/46163) and [Docker Desktop](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/47436), with CNI implementations like [Cilium](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/44198) and [Calico](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40973), and on services that ship in-house CNI implementations like [OpenShift](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42341) and [Amazon EKS](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340).
Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

> At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.

Author: ```suggestion
At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach Beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.
```

this ensures that we can establish traffic redirection early enough to prevent traffic escaping during startup,
without relying on things like init containers.
  - If an *already-running* pod becomes eligible for ambient enrollment, the istio-cni node agent’s Kubernetes API watcher
triggers a new pod event, and redirection is configured in the same manner.
- The istio-cni node agent hops into the pod’s network namespace and establishes network redirection rules inside the pod
network namespace, such that packets entering and leaving the pod are intercepted and transparently redirected to local
proxy listening [ports](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#ports) (15008, 15006, 15001).
- The istio-cni node agent then informs the node ztunnel over a Unix domain socket that it should establish local proxy
listening ports inside the pod’s network namespace, (on 15008, 15006, and 15001), and provides ztunnel with a low-level
Linux [file descriptor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_descriptor) representing the pod’s network namespace.
  - While typically sockets are created within a Linux network namespace by the process actually running inside that

> network namespace, it is perfectly possible leverage Linux’s low-level socket API to allow a process running in one

Author: ```suggestion
network namespace, it is perfectly possible to leverage Linux’s low-level socket API to allow a process running in one
```

Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) layer. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

At Solo, we had been working hard for 9 months on an innovative internal solution to solve this and we had decided
to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster
so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their
platforms regardless of their preferred CNIs.

## How did we get here?

> ### Istio and CNI - What’s The Relationship?

Author: ```suggestion
### Service meshes and CNIs: it's complicated
```

Istio is a service mesh, and service meshes by definition are not *CNI implementations* - service meshes build on top of the
low-level, standards-compliant CNI implementation present in Kubernetes clusters to offer the high-level policy and security
controls users need at scale.

Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply lots of high-level authentication and authorization policy
at the service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the
basic networking pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in
your cluster.

Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house CNI implementation, the Istio project has chosen not
to, for maximum compatibility with managed offerings, cross-vendor support, and composability with the broader CNCF ecosystem.

### Traffic redirection in ambient alpha

> The [Istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) component is an optional component in the sidecar data plane mode,

Author: ```suggestion
The [istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) component is an optional component in the sidecar data plane mode,
```

---
title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

> ## Introduction
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

in which you can configure how packets get from one network namespace to another. You can use tunnels, overlay networks,
go through the host network namespace, or bypass it. You can go through the Linux user space networking stack,
or you can skip it and shuttle packets back and forth in the kernel space stack, etc. For every possible approach,
there’s probably a CNI implementation out there that makes use of it.

Which meant that with the previous redirection approach, there were a lot of CNI implementations ambient simply wouldn’t
work with. Given its reliance on host network namespace packet redirection - any CNI that didn’t route packets thru the
host network namespace would need a different redirection implementation. And even for CNIs that did do this, we would
have unavoidable and potentially unresolvable problems with conflicting host-level rules. Do we intercept before the CNI,
or after? Will some CNIs break if we do one, or the other, and they aren’t expecting that? Where and when is NetworkPolicy
enforced, since NetworkPolicy must be enforced in the host network namespace? Do we need lots of code to special-case
every popular CNI?

> ### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: The New Model

Author: ```suggestion
### Istio ambient traffic redirection: the new model
```

network namespace to create listening sockets in another network namespace, assuming the target network namespace is known
at creation time.
- The node-local ztunnel internally spins up a new proxy instance and listen port set, dedicated to the newly-added pod.
- Once the in-Pod redirect rules are in place and the ztunnel has established the listen ports, the pod is added in the
mesh and traffic begins flowing thru the node-local ztunnel, as before.

Here’s a basic diagram showing the flow of application pod being added to the ambient mesh:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./pod-added-to-ambient.svg"
    alt="pod added to the ambient mesh flow"
    >}}

Once the pod is successfully added to the ambient mesh, traffic to and from pods in the mesh will be fully encrypted with mTLS by default, as always with Istio.

Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every pod in the ambient mesh has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
has no awareness of either.

> Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh in the new ambient model:

Author: ```suggestion
Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh in the new model:
```

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-between-pods-in-ambient.svg"
    alt="HBONE traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh"
    >}}

And, as before, unencrypted plaintext traffic from outside the mesh can still be handled and policy enforced, for use cases
where that is necessary:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-plaintext.svg"
    alt="Plain text traffic flow between meshed pods"
    >}}

> ### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: What This Gets Us

Author: ```suggestion
### Istio ambient traffic redirection: what this gets us
```

The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network namespace.
To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though there is **no sidecar proxy running in the pod**
at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get packets **to and from** the pod. By design and by the CNI spec, they
do not care what happens to packets after that point.

This approach automatically eliminates conflicts with a wide range of CNI and NetworkPolicy implementations, and drastically
improves Istio ambient mesh compatibility with all major managed Kubernetes offerings across all major CNIs.

> ## Wrapping Up

Author: ```suggestion
## Wrapping up
```

Thanks to significant amounts of effort from our lovely community in testing the change with a large variety of Kubernetes platforms and CNIs, and many rounds of reviews from Istio maintainers, we are glad to announce that the [ztunnel](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/pull/747) and [istio-cni](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/48253) PRs implementing this feature merged to Istio 1.21 and are enabled by default for ambient, so Istio users can start running ambient mesh on any Kubernetes platforms with any CNIs in Istio 1.21 or newer. We’ve tested this with GKE,
AKS, and EKS and all the CNI implementations they offer, as well as with 3rd-party CNIs like

> Calico and Cilium, as well as platforms like OpenShift, with solid results. We are extremely excited that we are able to

Author: ```suggestion
Calico and Cilium, as well as platforms like OpenShift, with solid results.

We are extremely excited that we are able to
```

---
title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"

> keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]

Reviewer 3: We seem to be avoiding talking about the Waypoint proxy in this blog post. Is this intentional?

Reviewer 4: Not so much avoiding it, just not introducing it, as Waypoints aren't involved in the problems we had or how we solved them - this is about how to get basic TCP traffic to and from the ztunnel - the waypoint isn't in the picture yet.

Author: yep Ben is right, we are not changing waypoint here so no need to mention it. Mark this as resolved.

---

> The Istio project [announced its innovative new ambient mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022, and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

Reviewer 6: Already used "innovative" in the sub-title to refer to something else. I suggest: `The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - it's new sidecarless dataplane mode]`

Author: updated

> and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

Author: ```suggestion
and [released an alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.
```

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient data plane mode under limited configurations and environments.

Author: ```suggestion
Our alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient data plane mode under limited configurations and environments.
```

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted with many CNI and networking implementations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done. However, the conditions were quite limited. Ambient mode relies on transparently redirecting traffic, and the initial mechanism we used to do that conflicted several categories of 3rd-party CNI implementations.
```

> Through GitHub issues and Slack discussions, we heard our users wanted to be able to use ambient mode in [minikube](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/46163) and [Docker Desktop](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/47436), with CNI implementations like [Cilium](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/44198) and [Calico](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40973), and on services like [OpenShift](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42341) and [Amazon EKS](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Through GitHub issues and Slack discussions, we heard our users wanted to be able to use ambient mode in [minikube](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/46163) and [Docker Desktop](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/47436), with CNI implementations like [Cilium](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/44198) and [Calico](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/40973), and on services that ship in-house CNI implementations like [OpenShift](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42341) and [Amazon EKS](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340).
```

> Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) layer. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Getting broad support for Kubernetes anywhere has become the No. 1 requirement for ambient mesh moving to Beta — people have come to expect Istio to work on any Kubernetes platform and with any Container Network Interface (CNI) implementation. After all, Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being all around you!
```

At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We had decided
to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster

> so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their

Author: ambient is not capitalized in any of our other blogs so changed to lower case a

> At Solo, we had been working hard for 9 months on an innovative internal solution to solve this and we had decided
> to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster
> so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their
> platforms regardless of their preferred CNIs.

Author: ```suggestion
At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We had decided
to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster
so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their
platforms regardless of their preferred CNIs.
```

> At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We had decided
> to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster
> so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their
> platforms regardless of their preferred CNIs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At Solo, we've been integrating ambient mode into our Gloo Mesh product, and came up with an innovative solution to this problem. We decided to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster, so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their platforms regardless of their existing or preferred CNI implementation.
```

## How did we get here?

### Service meshes and CNIs: it's complicated

Istio is a service mesh, and service meshes by definition are not *CNI implementations* - service meshes build on top of the
low-level, standards-compliant CNI implementation present in Kubernetes clusters to offer the high-level policy and security

> controls users need at scale.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Istio is a service mesh, and all service meshes by strict definition are not *CNI implementations* - service meshes require a [spec-compliant, primary CNI implementation](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/#overview-1) to be present in every Kubernetes cluster, and rest on top of that. 

This primary CNI implementation may be provided by your cloud provider (AKS, GKE, and EKS all ship their own), or by third-party CNI implementations like Calico. Some service meshes may also ship bundled with their own primary CNI implementation, which they explicitly require to function.

> Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply lots of high-level authentication and authorization policy

Author: believe it is resolved

> Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply lots of high-level authentication and authorization policy
> at the service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the
> basic networking pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in
> your cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply of high-level authentication and authorization policy at the service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the basic networking pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in your cluster.
```

> Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house CNI implementation, the Istio project has chosen not
> to, for maximum compatibility with managed offerings, cross-vendor support, and composability with the broader CNCF ecosystem.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house primary CNI implementation, and it is sometimes possible to run two primary CNI implementations in parallel within the same cluster, in practice this introduces a whole host of compatibility issues, strange behaviors, reduced featuresets, and simple incompatibilities due to the wildly varying mechanisms each CNI implementation might employ internally.

To avoid this, the Istio project has chosen not to ship or require their own primary CNI implementation, or even require a "preferred" CNI implementation - instead choosing to support CNI chaining with the widest possible ecosystem of CNI implementations, and ensuring maximum compatibility with managed offerings, cross-vendor support, and composability with the broader CNCF ecosystem.
```

### Traffic redirection in ambient alpha

> The [istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) component is an optional component in the sidecar data plane mode,

Reviewer 6: The [istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) is a plugin which extends the CNI implementation (Calico, Cilium, cloud provider variant) that is running on the cluster. This is an optional plugin in the sidecar data plane mode, commonly used to remove the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/) needed to set up the pod network traffic redirection to/from the Istio sidecar proxy.

Reviewer: Istio-cni is more than just a plugin. It's also a daemonset that handles node-level items such as the plugin installation, and configuration for ambient where appropriate. I think the link alone is more appropriate here.

commonly used to remove the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/) for
users deploying pods into the mesh. 

> istio-cni is a required component in the ambient

Author: Thanks, addressed locally will push soon.

data plane mode. Whenever pods are added to an ambient mesh, the istio-cni component configures traffic redirection for all
incoming and outgoing traffic between the pods and the [ztunnel](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) running on
the pod's node, via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between sidecar and ambient modes is that 

> the redirection in ambient is _across network namespaces_, from the application namespace to the Istio system namespace

Reviewer 3: As we are using the term `namespace` both in the context of Linux networking namespace and K8s namespaces, it could be a bit confusing for the users. Can you rephrase it?

Reviewer 6: Is this what is meant by "host network based " or "host-based" as mentioned in the next section?

Author: Tried to clarify this, PTAL

> the pod's node, via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between sidecar and ambient modes is that 
> the redirection in ambient is _across network namespaces_, from the application namespace to the Istio system namespace
> where ztunnel typically runs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the pod's node, via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between the sidecar mechanism and the ambient alpha mechanism is that in the latter, pod traffic was redirected out of the pod network namespace, and into the ztunnel network namespace - necessarily passing through the node's network namespace on the way, which is where the bulk of the traffic redirection rules to achieve this were implemented.
```

> As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that
> the host network based traffic redirection mechanism we had been using for Istio ambient traffic capture and redirection
> during the alpha stage was not going to meet our requirements. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that capturing and redirecting pod traffic in the node network namespace, as we were during ambient alpha, was not going to meet our requirements. 
```

> These are the two biggest challenges with the host-based approach:
> - The default CNI’s node-level networking configuration could interfere with the node-level networking configuration
> from istio-cni, whether it is with eBPF or iptables.
> - If users deploy a network policy for the default CNI, the network policy may not be enforced when istio-cni is deployed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The fundamental problem with this approach (redirecting traffic in the node network namespace) is that this is precisely the same spot where the cluster's primary CNI implementation *must* configure traffic
routing/networking rules. This created inevitable conflicts: 

- The primary CNI implementation's basic node-level networking configuration could interfere with the node-level ambient networking configuration from Istio's CNI extension, causing traffic disruption and other conflicts.
- If users deployed a network policy to be enforced by the primary CNI implementation, the network policy might not be enforced when the Istio CNI extension is deployed (depending on how the primary CNI implementation enforces NetworkPolicy)

While we could design around this on a case-by-case basis for _some_ primary CNI implementations, we could not sustainably do so for _all_ of them that we wanted to support. We considered eBPF, but realized any eBPF implementation would have the same basic problem, as there is no standardized way to safely chain/extend arbitrary eBPF programs at this time.
```

### Addressing the challenges

> Applying any traffic

Author: resolved

> Applying any traffic
> routing/networking rules in the node-level network namespace invites unresolvable conflicts/incompatibilities with
> CNIs (which might use a wide variety of fundamentally networking topologies on the node) - they *must* configure traffic
> routing/networking rules in the node-level network namespace. We realized any eBPF implementation would have the same
> basic problem, as there is no standardized way to safely chain/extend arbitrary eBPF programs at this time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A new solution was necessary - doing redirection of any sort in the node's network namespace would create unavoidable conflicts, unless we compromised our compatibility requirements.
```

In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between sidecar and application pod, as both operate within
the pod's network namespace. This led to a light-bulb moment: why not mimic sidecars, and configure the redirection in
the application network namespace? 

While this sounds like a "crazy simple" thought, is this even possible, given ztunnel runs

> in the Istio system namespace? After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace

Author: I didn't say istio-system namespace as user doesn't have to deploy it to istio-system namespace.

could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace, which is a basic Linux socket capability.
However, to make this work, and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel
as well as the istio-cni agent.

### Traffic redirection in ambient now

After sufficient prototyping and validating that the innovative approach does work for all the Kubernetes platforms we have
access to, we built the confidence of the work and contributed to upstream to switch to this new traffic redirection

> model - an *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has

Author: Thanks, addressed locally will push soon.

been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.

The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection
sockets inside the pod’s network namespace, while still running outside the pod. With this approach, the traffic redirection
between ztunnel and application pods happens in a way that’s very similar to sidecars and application pods today and is
strictly invisible to any Kubernetes CNI. Network policy from any Kubernetes CNIs can continue to be enforced,

> regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

Reviewer 3: We have seen that this works even with OVN-Kubernetes CNI where Network policies that are implemented using OpenFlow rules. In case you want, you can even include "OpenFlow" in the above sentence.

Author: I don't feel strongly this should be included. If you do feel strongly, please suggest a change. Thx!

> regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

Reviewer: Capitalizing pod vs. not is not something we consistently do across all our docs.

> regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

Author: I kept in-Pod as an exception... otherwise, just pod.  Let me know if i should update.

## Technical deep dive of in-pod traffic redirection

First, let’s go over the basics of how a packet travels between pods in Kubernetes.

### Linux, Kubernetes, and CNI  - What’s A Network Namespace, And Why Does It Matter?

> In Linux, a *container* is simply one or more Linux processes running within isolated namespaces, and a Linux namespace

Reviewer: There's also a mix between network namespaces and namespaces, which might confuse people who aren't fully up to speed on networking namespaces. For example, the "section" begins with "a Linux namespace" and talks about processes, but then "For instance, if you create a new Linux network namespace". Maybe some clarification around this as well?

> In Linux, a *container* is simply one or more Linux processes running within isolated namespaces, and a Linux namespace

Author: Both comments are addressed

> After prototyping and sufficiently validating that this novel approach does work for all the Kubernetes platforms we have access to, we built confidence in the work and decided to contribute this new traffic redirection
> model. An *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.

Author: ```suggestion
After prototyping and sufficiently validating that this novel approach does work for all the Kubernetes platforms we have access to, we built confidence in the work and decided to contribute to upstream this new traffic redirection
model, an *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.
```

> The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection

Author: ```suggestion
The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the c-located ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection
```

sharing one Linux networking stack.

Linux namespaces are conceptually a lot like Kubernetes namespaces - logical labels that organize and isolate different
active processes, and allow you to create rules about what things within a given namespace can see and what rules are
applied to them - they simply operate at a much lower level.

When a process running within a network namespace creates a TCP packet outward bound for something else, the packet must be
processed by any local rules within the local network namespace first, then leave the local network namespace, passing
into another one.

For example, in plain Kubernetes without any mesh installed, a pod might create a packet and send it to another pod, and
the packet might (depending on how networking was set up):
- Be processed by any rules within the source pod’s network namespace.
- Leave the source pod network namespace, and bubble up into the node’s network namespace where it is processed by any rules in that namespace.
- From there, finally be redirected into the target pod’s network namespace (and processed by any rules there).

> In Kubernetes, the [CRI](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) (container *runtime* interface) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces

Reviewer 7: nit: [Container Runtime Interface (CRI)] (since that's how the CNI was mentioned the first time :))

Reviewer 7: also, seems like an odd line break as well

Author: believe this is resolved

for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [CNI](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni) (container *networking* interface),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

> ### Istio ambient traffic redirection: why did we drop the previous model?

Reviewer 7: I'd remove the "Istio ambient traffic redirection" from the title -- just make it "Why did we drop the previous redirection model?"

Author: updated

In Istio ambient, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSet:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.

> - A CNI node agent that handles enrolling new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

Reviewer 7: should we use the word "add pods into the mesh" instead of enrolling? (I wonder if readers might think this "enrollment" means something else; not sure if we used this term before for "adding" or "making" pods part of the mesh)

Reviewer 4: I'm to blame for injecting this, I think it's conceptually correct and it's simpler than typing `adding pods to the mesh` over and over again, but I agree it's yet another term and I might just be lazy.

Reviewer: I think using "adding" would be more consistent to how we discuss it globally.

Author: Agreed, adding is more consistent with rest of docs - will address

In the previous ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment worked:

> - A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled` indicating it should

Reviewer 7: re-write as an active sentence:

"istio-cni node agent detects an existing or newly-started pod with its namespace labeled..."

be included in the ambient mesh, is detected by the istio-cni node agent.
- The istio-cni node agent then establishes network redirection rules in the top-level node network namespace, such that
packets entering or leaving the enrolled pod would be intercepted and redirected to that node’s ztunnel on the relevant
proxy ports (15008, 15006, or 15001).

This meant that for a packet created by a mesh-enrolled pod, that packet would leave that source pod, enter the node’s
top-level network namespace, and then be intercepted and redirected to that node’s ztunnel (running in its own network
namespace) for proxying to the destination pod, with the return trip being similar.

This model worked well enough as a placeholder for the initial Ambient launch, but as mentioned, it has a fundamental
problem - there are many CNI implementations, and in Linux there are many fundamentally different and incompatible ways
in which you can configure how packets get from one network namespace to another. You can use tunnels, overlay networks,
you can go through the host network namespace, or you can bypass it. You can go through the Linux user space networking stack,

> or you can skip it and shuttle packets back and forth in the kernel space stack, etc etc. And for every possible approach,

Reviewer 7: , etc.

Author: updated, will push soon

there’s probably a CNI implementation out there that makes use of it.

> Which meant that with the previous redirection approach, there were lots of CNI implementations Ambient simply wouldn’t

Reviewer 7: multiple sentences.

"... Ambient wouldn't work with. Given its reliance on node network ... any CNI that didn't ...".

Author: addressed

> - A CNI node agent that handles adding new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

Author: ```suggestion
- A `istio-cni` node agent that handles adding new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.
```

work with, given its reliance on node network namespace packet redirection - any CNI that didn’t route packets thru the
node network namespace would need a different redirection implementation. And even for CNIs that did do this, we would
have unavoidable and potentially unresolvable problems with conflicting node-level rules - do we intercept before the CNI,
or after? Will some CNIs break if we do one, or the other, and they aren’t expecting that? Where and when is NetworkPolicy
enforced, since NetworkPolicy must be enforced in the node network namespace? Do we need lots of code to special-case
every popular CNI?

> ### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: The Current Model

Reviewer 7: "New redirection model" 

for a second, I wasn't sure if you're talking about the "current" redirection model (i.e. without in-pod) or the new one :)

Author: good comment, thx!

> In the current ambient model, this is how mesh enrollment works:

Reviewer 7: "new" (instead of current)

Author: updated

- A Kubernetes pod (existing or newly-started), with labels indicating it should be enrolled in the ambient mesh, is detected by

> the istio-cni node agent.

Reviewer 7: rewrite to active: "istio-cni node agent detects a k8s  pod.."

Author: updated

>   - If a *new* pod is started that should be enrolled, a standard CNI plugin (as installed and managed by the istio-cni agent)

Reviewer 7: should you just say "istio-cni" instead of saying "standard CNI plugin, installed and managed by the istio-cni agent"? The latter makes it harder to understand as I am not 100% what a "standard" CNI plugin is in this case.

Author: updated.  agreed standard is confusing here.

> proxy ports (15008, 15006, or 15001).

Author: ```suggestion
proxy [ports](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#ports) (15008, 15006, or 15001).
```

> is triggered by the CRI, used to push a new pod event to the node’s istio-cni agent, and block pod startup until redirection

Reviewer 7: the sentence is unclear a bit. Is the CNI plugin pushing a new pod event? Perhaps say something like" when the pods starts, the istio-cni detects it and can block the startup until redirection is done"

is established. Since CNI plugins are invoked by the CRI as early as possible in the Kubernetes pod creation process,
this ensures that we can establish traffic redirection early enough to prevent traffic escaping during startup,
without relying on things like init containers.

>   - If an *already-running* pod becomes eligible for ambient enrollment, the istio-cni node agent’s Kubernetes API watcher

Reviewer 7: "a new pod event is triggered" (vs. "istio-cni node agent's Kubernetes API watcher")

Author: added

triggers a new pod event, and redirection is configured in the same manner.
- The istio-cni node agent hops into the pod’s network namespace and establishes network redirection rules inside the pod
network namespace, such that packets entering and leaving the pod are intercepted and transparently redirected to local

> proxy listening [ports](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/blob/master/ARCHITECTURE.md#ports) (15008, 15006, 15001).

Reviewer 7: local proxy === ztunnel running on the node?

Author: updated

- The istio-cni node agent then informs the node ztunnel over a Unix domain socket that it should establish local proxy
listening ports inside the pod’s network namespace, (on 15008, 15006, and 15001), and provides ztunnel with a low-level
Linux [file descriptor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_descriptor) representing the pod’s network namespace.
  - While typically sockets are created within a Linux network namespace by the process actually running inside that

> network namespace, it is perfectly possible leverage Linux’s low-level socket API to allow a process running in one

Reviewer 7: typo: "to leverage Linux's"

Author: updated

>   - If a *new* pod is started that should be added to the ambient mesh, a CNI plugin (as installed and managed by the istio-cni agent) is triggered by the CRI.

Author: ```suggestion
  - If a *new* pod is started that should be added to the ambient mesh, a CNI plugin (as installed and managed by the `istio-cni` agent) is triggered by the CRI.
```

at creation time.
- The node-local ztunnel internally spins up a new proxy instance and listen port set, dedicated to the newly-enrolled pod.
- Once the in-pod redirect rules are in place and the ztunnel has established the listen ports, the pod is enrolled in the
mesh and traffic begins flowing thru the node-local ztunnel, as before.

Here’s a basic diagram showing the pod enrollment flow:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./pod-enrollment.png"
    alt="pod enrollment flow"
    >}}

Once the enrollment is completed, traffic to and from pods in the mesh will be fully encrypted by default, as always with Istio.

Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every ambient-enrolled
pod has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
has no awareness of either.

Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between meshed pods in the current ambient model:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-between-mesh-pods.png"

>     alt="traffic flows between meshed pods"

Reviewer 3: what about the following...

```suggestion
    alt="HBONE traffic flows between meshed pods"
```

    >}}

And, as before, unencrypted plaintext traffic from outside the mesh can still be handled and policy enforced, for use cases
where that is necessary:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-plaintext.png"

>     alt="traffic flows between meshed pods"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    alt="Plain text traffic flow between meshed pods"
```

    >}}

### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: What This Gets Us

The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network
namespace. To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though

> there is, as before, **no sidecar proxy running in the pod** at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get

Reviewer 7: I'd either write "there's" or something like: "it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though there's **no sidecar proxy running in the pod** at all"

One the first read it sounded like you're saying "it looks like there's a sidecar car, even though there is" :D

Author: updated

> Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every pod in ambient
> pod has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod

Author: ```suggestion
Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every pod in the ambient mesh has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
```

---

> title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"

Author: Yes, this mode will be default for ambient in 1.21 whenever the code lands there. I did try to explain in the intro on the prob: doesn't work with most CNIs.

A little cautious on putting ambient everywhere as it is not beyond k8s clusters yet...

> title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"

Reviewer 6: Throwing another title idea: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"

> title: "Design Istio Ambient to Work with Any Platforms and CNIs"

Author: Liking it @rvennam - thanks!!

description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

## Introduction

Since the initial [launch](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) of ambient in 2022 and ambient reaching
[Alpha](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) status in early 2023 , the Istio community has
been focused on stabilizing Ambient for beta, where we can start recommending users to run Ambient in production

> with caution. Through various GitHub issues and slack messages, we heard strong desires to support ambient

Author: Yep that is the reason.

[AWS Cloud](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/42340) etc. This has become the No. 1 requirement for Ambient
Beta - support Ambient to work with any Platforms or CNIs, maintaining Istio’s existing broad and general compatibility
with various Kubernetes platforms with different Container Network Interface(CNI) layers. After all,
Ambient wouldn’t be ambient without being able to run everywhere with any CNIs.

At Solo, we had been working hard for 9 months on an innovative internal solution to solve this and we had decided
to [upstream](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/48212) our changes in late 2023 to help Ambient reach beta faster
so more users can operate ambient in Istio 1.21 or newer and enjoy the benefits of ambient sidecar-less mesh in their
platforms regardless of their preferred CNIs.

## How do we get here?

### Istio and CNI - What’s The Relationship?

Istio is a service mesh, and service meshes by definition are not *CNI implementations* - service meshes build on top of the
low-level, standards-compliant CNI implementation present in Kubernetes clusters to offer the high-level policy and security

> controls users need at scale.

Reviewer 4: I'll redo.

Intent is to convey:

A service mesh depends on a CNI _implementation_

That CNI implementation may be provided by the cloud provider, another CNCF CNI implementation, or a service mesh might also implement a full CNI implementation of it's own and require that to function.

Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply lots of high-level authentication and authorization policy
at the service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the
basic networking pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in
your cluster.

Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house CNI implementation, the Istio project has chosen not

> to, for maximum compatibility with managed offerings, cross-vendor support, and composability with the broader CNCF ecosystem.

Reviewer 8: again, address the fact that Istio has a CNI, and possibly introduce what the difference between [an interface plugin and a chained plugin](https://www.cni.dev/docs/spec/#overview-1)

Reviewer 4: Istio doesn't have a CNI implementation (which is a large and complex thing), it extends whatever the CNI implementation you are using (Calico, Cilum, cloud provider variant) with a CNI plugin.

Again, will reword. It's a bit messy. We call the Istio component a "CNI agent" but it does not provide a CNI implementation and in fact requires one to already be in place.

Reviewer 6: "istio-cni" being a CNI itself is a common confusion. I recommend tackling this head-on with what you said.

### Traffic redirection in ambient alpha

The [Istio-cni](/docs/setup/additional-setup/cni/) component is an optional component in the sidecar data plane mode,
commonly used to remove the [requirement for the `NET_ADMIN` and `NET_RAW` capabilities](/docs/ops/deployment/requirements/) for
users deploying pods into the Istio mesh. With the launch of ambient, istio-cni has become a required component for ambient
data plane mode. Whenever pods are added to ambient mesh, the istio-cni component configures traffic redirection for all

> incoming and outgoing traffic between the application pods and their co-located [ztunnel](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) on

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
incoming and outgoing traffic between the pods and the [ztunnel](/blog/2023/rust-based-ztunnel/) running on
```

the node via the node-level network namespace. The key difference between sidecar and ambient on the traffic redirection is

> the redirection in ambient is across network namespaces, from the application namespace to the Istio’s system namespace

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the redirection in ambient is _across network namespaces_, from the application namespace to the Istio system namespace
```

where ztunnel typically runs.

As we tested more broadly in multiple Kubernetes environments which many of them have its default CNI, it became clear that
the host network based traffic redirection mechanism we had been using for Istio ambient traffic capture and redirection

> during the alpha stage was not going to meet our requirements. The following challenges were identified:

Reviewer 8: Did we not know this in advance?
"which many of them have its default CNI" - which default CNI?  The default Kubernetes CNI?  Is there such a thing, or do you mean the default CNI for an environment?

Reviewer 8: i.e. Do you mean "many of which have their own default CNI"?

Reviewer 4: We should consistently say _CNI implementation_ everywhere we are not talking about the Istio component, I think.

> during the alpha stage was not going to meet our requirements. The following challenges were identified:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
during the alpha stage was not going to meet our requirements. 

These are the two biggest challenges with the host-based approach:
```

> - The default CNI’s node-level networking configuration could interfere with the node-level networking configuration

Reviewer 8: "interface CNI" or "provider CNI" or something, default still confuses me

Reviewer 8: plus you're saying "The thing could interfere with the thing" which is a bit of a tautology :)

Reviewer 8: base CNI?

Reviewer 3: cluster CNI?

from istio-cni, whether it is with eBPF or iptables.

> - If users deploy a network policy for the default CNI, the network policy may not be enforced when istio-cni is deployed.

Reviewer 8: Can you elaborate a little more on how/why?

> ### Thought process on solving the challenges

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
### Addressing the challenges
```

> At Solo, we have been brainstorming a lot on these top challenges in Ambient. We realized that applying any traffic

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Applying any traffic
```

(We have a sentence starting "At Solo" above already)

routing/networking rules in the node-level network namespace invites unresolvable conflicts/incompatibilities with
CNIs (which might use a wide variety of fundamentally networking topologies on the node) - they *must* configure traffic

> routing/networking rules in the node-level network namespace. We realized any eBPF implementation would have the same

Reviewer 8: s/fundamentally/fundamental/

Isn't this just what you said in the point above?  
I take from this "we could end up in a race condition with the lower level CNI".  Is that right?

basic problem, as there is no standardized way to safely chain/extend arbitrary eBPF programs at this time.

> With sidecar data plane mode, it is intuitive to configure traffic redirection between sidecar and application pod within

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between sidecar and application pod, as both operate within
```

I think this is more fair?

> the pod network namespace. One day, a light-bulb moment arrived - why not mimic sidecars and configure the redirection in

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the pod's network namespace. This led to a light-bulb moment: why not mimic sidecars, and configure the redirection in
```

> the application network space? While this sounds a crazy simple thought, is this technically possible when ztunnel runs

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the application network namespace? 

While this sounds like a "crazy simple" thought, is this even possible, given ztunnel runs
```

> in the Istio’s system namespace? After a lot of research, we realized a Linux process running in one network namespace

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
in the Istio system namespace? After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace
```

is this a discovery that needed research?

could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace, which is a basic Linux socket capability.

> However, to make this work and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
However, to make this work, and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel
```

> as well as to the istio-cni agent.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
as well as the istio-cni agent.
```

### Traffic redirection in ambient now

> 

Reviewer 8: I don't know if we need another heading?

Reviewer: Agree, I don't see a lot of benefit personally.

Author: removed

Here’s a basic diagram showing the flow of application pod being added to the ambient mesh:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./pod-added-to-ambient.svg"
    alt="pod added to the ambient mesh flow"
    >}}

Once the pod is successfully added to the ambient mesh, traffic to and from pods in the mesh will be fully encrypted with mTLS by default, as always with Istio.

Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every pod in the ambient mesh has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
has no awareness of either.

Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh in the new model:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-between-pods-in-ambient.svg"
    alt="HBONE traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh"
    >}}

And, as before, unencrypted plaintext traffic from outside the mesh can still be handled and policy enforced, for use cases
where that is necessary:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-plaintext.svg"
    alt="Plain text traffic flow between meshed pods"
    >}}

> ### Istio ambient traffic redirection: what this gets us

Author: ```suggestion
### The new ambient traffic redirection: what this gets us
```

---
title: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.

> publishdate: 2024-01-26

Author: ```suggestion
publishdate: 2024-01-29
```

implementations like Calico and Cilium. Some service meshes may also ship bundled with their own primary CNI implementation, which they
explicitly require to function.

Basically, before you can do things like secure pod traffic with mTLS and apply high-level authentication and authorization policy at the
service mesh layer, you must have a functional Kubernetes cluster with a functional CNI implementation, to make sure the basic networking
pathways are set up so that packets can get from one pod to another (and from one node to another) in your cluster.

Though some service meshes may also ship and require their own in-house primary CNI implementation, and it is sometimes possible to run two
primary CNI implementations in parallel within the same cluster (for instance, one shipped by the cloud provider, and a 3rd-party
implementation), in practice this introduces a whole host of compatibility issues, strange behaviors, reduced feature sets, and some
incompatibilities due to the wildly varying mechanisms each CNI implementation might employ internally.

> To avoid this, the Istio project has chosen not to ship or require their own primary CNI implementation, or even require a "preferred" CNI

Author: ```suggestion
To avoid this, the Istio project has chosen not to ship or require our own primary CNI implementation, or even require a "preferred" CNI
```

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much to Kubernetes or the container runtime what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

### Why did we drop the previous model?

In Istio ambient mesh, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSets:
- An efficient ztunnel which handles mesh traffic proxying duties, and L4 policy enforcement.
- A CNI node agent that handles adding new and existing pods into the ambient mesh.

In the previous ambient mesh implementation, this is how application pod is added to the ambient mesh:

> - The `istio-cni` node agent detects an existing or newly-started Kubernetes pod with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=enabled`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- The `istio-cni` node agent detects an existing or newly-started Kubernetes pod with its namespace labeled with `istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient`, indicating that it should be included in the ambient mesh.
```

Author: good catch!

Reviewer 9: Same error in 2 places 😃 https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/14524#pullrequestreview-1849524995

---
title: "Maturing Istio Ambient: Compatibility Across Various Kubernetes Providers and CNIs"
description: An innovative traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and ztunnel.
publishdate: 2024-01-26
attribution: "Ben Leggett (Solo.io), Yuval Kohavi (Solo.io), Lin Sun (Solo.io)"
keywords: [Ambient,Istio,CNI,ztunnel,traffic]
---

The Istio project [announced ambient mesh - its new sidecar-less dataplane mode](/blog/2022/introducing-ambient-mesh/) in 2022,
and [released an Alpha implementation](/news/releases/1.18.x/announcing-1.18/#ambient-mesh) in early 2023.

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient data plane mode, under limited conditions.

Author: @bleggett I'm a little worried about this additional clarification as many folks say our alpha only works in kind so we can't really claim `common configs and envs`

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient data plane mode, under limited conditions.

Author: How about limited configurations and environments?

> Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient model, under limited conditions, which it certainly has done.

Author: ```suggestion
Our Alpha was focused on proving out the value of the ambient data plane mode, under limited conditions.
```

standardized way to safely chain/extend arbitrary eBPF programs at this time, and we would still potentially have a hard time supporting
non-eBPF CNIs with this approach.

### Addressing the challenges

A new solution was necessary - doing redirection of any sort in the node's network namespace would create unavoidable conflicts,
unless we compromised our compatibility requirements.

In sidecar mode, it is trivial to configure traffic redirection between the sidecar and application pod, as both operate within
the pod's network namespace. This led to a light-bulb moment: why not mimic sidecars, and configure the redirection in
the application pod's network namespace?

While this sounds like a "crazy simple" thought, is this even possible, given ztunnel runs
in the Istio system namespace? After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace
could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace, which is a basic Linux socket capability.
However, to make this work, and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel

> as well as the `istio-cni`` agent.

Reviewer 10: This might fix the lint:
```suggestion
as well as the `istio-cni` agent.
```

> While this sounds like a "crazy simple" thought, is this even possible, given ztunnel runs
> in the Istio system namespace? After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace
> could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace, which is a basic Linux socket capability.
> However, to make this work, and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel
> as well as the `istio-cni` agent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While this sounds like a "simple" thought, how would this even be possible? A critical requirement of ambient is that ztunnel must run outside application pods, in the Istio system namespace. After some research, we discovered a Linux process running in one network namespace could create and own listening sockets within another network namespace. This is a basic capability of the Linux socket API.
However, to make this work operationally and cover all pod lifecycle scenarios, we had to make architectural changes to the ztunnel as well as to the `istio-cni` node agent.
```

Pass for readability.

> After prototyping and sufficiently validating that this innovative approach does work for all the Kubernetes platforms we have
> access to, we built confidence in the work and decided to contribute this new traffic redirection
> model. An *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has
> been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After prototyping and sufficiently validating that this novel approach does work for all the Kubernetes platforms we have access to, we built confidence in the work and decided to contribute this new traffic redirection
model. An *in-Pod* traffic redirection mechanism between workload pods and the ztunnel node proxy component that has been built from the ground up to be highly compatible with all major cloud providers and CNIs.
```

We said `innovative` once, let's switch it up and say `novel` here, to avoid repetition.

The key innovation is to deliver the pod’s network namespace to the ztunnel so that ztunnel can start its redirection

> sockets inside the pod’s network namespace, while still running outside the pod. With this approach, the traffic redirection

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
sockets _inside_ the pod’s network namespace, while still running outside the pod. With this approach, the traffic redirection
```

between ztunnel and application pods happens in a way that’s very similar to sidecars and application pods today and is

> strictly invisible to any Kubernetes CNI. Network policy from any Kubernetes CNIs can continue to be enforced,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
strictly invisible to any Kubernetes primary CNI operating in the node network namespace. Network policy can continue to be enforced and managed by any Kubernetes primary CNI,
```

clarify, plurals.

> regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, there is no conflict between the in-Pod traffic redirection and the CNI.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
regardless of whether the CNI uses eBPF or iptables, without conflict.
```

Shorten sentence.

## Technical deep dive of in-Pod traffic redirection

First, let’s go over the basics of how a packet travels between pods in Kubernetes.

### Linux, Kubernetes, and CNI  - what’s a network namespace, and why does it matter?

In Linux, a *container* is one or more Linux processes running within isolated Linux namespaces. A Linux namespace
is simply a kernel flag that controls what processes running within that namespace are able to see. For instance, if you

> create a new Linux network namespace via the `ip netns add my-linux-netns` command and run a process inside it, that process can only see the networking rules created

Reviewer 11: This line has [lint errors](https://prow.istio.io/view/gs/istio-prow/pr-logs/pull/istio_istio.io/14524/lint_istio.io/1751053195808870400)

Author: Yep working on it locally. thanks both!

Author: Hi @ericvn a bit lost on what is the linter complaining. Here is the local output:

<img width="805" alt="image" src="https://github.com/istio/istio.io/assets/1588319/3f155b1b-e73d-458c-89ae-bf358e724064">

Reviewer 10: No. I suspect the back-ticks are incorrect since the text between them should be ignored.

Author: Thx Eric, I think your other change should have fixed it.... fingers crossed!

> within that network namespace. It can not see any network rules created outside of it - even though everything running on that machine is still
> sharing one Linux networking stack.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
within that network namespace. It can not see any network rules created outside of it - even though everything running on that machine is still sharing one Linux networking stack.
```

weird LB (not sure if these matter in rendering)

processed by any local rules within the local network namespace first, then leave the local network namespace, passing
into another one.

For example, in plain Kubernetes without any mesh installed, a pod might create a packet and send it to another pod, and
the packet might (depending on how networking was set up):
- Be processed by any rules within the source pod’s network namespace.
- Leave the source pod network namespace, and bubble up into the node’s network namespace where it is processed by any rules in that namespace.
- From there, finally be redirected into the target pod’s network namespace (and processed by any rules there).

In Kubernetes, the [Container *Runtime* Interface (CRI)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cri/) is responsible for talking to the Linux kernel, creating network namespaces
for new pods, and starting processes within them. The CRI then invokes the [Container *Networking* Interface (CNI)](https://github.com/containernetworking/cni),
which is responsible for wiring up the networking rules in the various Linux network namespaces, so that packets leaving and

> entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to
> accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
entering the new pod can get where they’re supposed to go. It doesn’t matter much to Kubernetes or the container runtime what topology or mechanism the CNI uses to accomplish this - as long as packets get where they’re supposed to be, Kubernetes works and everyone is happy.
```

### Why did we drop the previous model?

> In Istio ambient mesh, every node has a minimum of two containers running as Kubernetes DaemonSets:

Author: Thanks, I saw it too and added it to .spelling since it already has DaemonSet there.

mesh and traffic begins flowing thru the node-local ztunnel, as before.

Here’s a basic diagram showing the flow of application pod being added to the ambient mesh:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./pod-added-to-ambient.png"
    alt="pod added to the ambient mesh flow"
    >}}

Once the pod is successfully added to the ambient mesh, traffic to and from pods in the mesh will be fully encrypted with mTLS by default, as always with Istio.

Traffic will now enter and leave the pod network namespace as encrypted traffic - it will look like every pod in ambient
pod has the ability to enforce mesh policy and securely encrypt traffic, even though the user application running in the pod
has no awareness of either.

Here’s a diagram to illustrate how encrypted traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh in the new ambient model:

{{< image width="100%"
    link="./traffic-flows-between-pods-in-ambient.png"
    alt="HBONE traffic flows between pods in the ambient mesh"
    >}}

And, as before, unencrypted plaintext traffic from outside the mesh can still be handled and policy enforced, for use cases
where that is necessary:

{{< image width="100%"

>     link="./traffic-flows-plaintext.png"

Reviewer 4: Can we move these to SVG, if that's supported?

Author: Not obvious to me how to export as SVG from excalidraw - let me try research a bit more. Most of our blogs are using png.

    alt="Plain text traffic flow between meshed pods"
    >}}

### Istio Ambient Traffic Redirection: What This Gets Us

The end result of the new ambient capture model is that all traffic capture and redirection happens inside the pod’s network namespace.
To the node, the CNI, and everything else, it looks like there is a sidecar proxy inside the pod, even though there is **no sidecar proxy running in the pod**
at all. Remember that the job of CNI implementations is to get packets **to and from** the pod. By design and by the CNI spec, they
do not care what happens to packets after that point.

This approach automatically eliminates conflicts with a wide range of CNI and NetworkPolicy implementations, and drastically
improves Istio ambient mesh compatibility with all major managed Kubernetes offerings across all major CNIs.

## Wrapping Up

> With gracious support from the community on testing the change with various Kubernetes platforms and CNIs, and many rounds
> of reviews from Istio maintainers, we are glad the [ztunnel](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/pull/747) and [istio-cni](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/48253) PRs merged to Istio 1.21 so our users
> can start running ambient mesh on any Kubernetes platforms with any CNIs in Istio 1.21 or newer. We’ve tested this with GKE,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Thanks to significant amounts of effort from our lovely community in testing the change with a large variety of Kubernetes platforms and CNIs, and many rounds of reviews from Istio maintainers, we are glad to announce that the [ztunnel](https://github.com/istio/ztunnel/pull/747) and [istio-cni](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/48253) PRs implementing this feature merged to Istio 1.21 and are enabled by default for ambient, so Istio users can start running ambient mesh on any Kubernetes platforms with any CNIs in Istio 1.21 or newer. We’ve tested this with GKE,
```

Clarify
